INNERSPACE
Introduction to Kabbalah, Meditation and Prophecy

by

Rabbi Aryeh Kaplan z"l
October 23. 1934 — January 28. 1983

Edited by

Abraham Sutton

Jerusalem 5751 (1991)

2                                         INNERSPACE

Acknowledgments
The editor would like to express his appreciation to Rabbis
Mordechai Attic
and
Shabtai Teichcr

for their invaluable assistance in preparing the original transcripts for publication.

This book contains Divine Names. Do not take it into the hathroora or any other undean place.

Copyright 6 1990 by Moznaim Publishing Corporation
All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof, may not be reproduced
in any form without the written permission of the publisher.
For information write:
Moznaim Publishing Corporation
4304 12th Avenue
Brooklyn, New York 11219
Tel. (718) 438-7680, 853-0525
1st printing 1990
2nd printing 1991

Printed and bound in Jerusalem, Israel
by Vagshal Ltd.
Typesetting by Vagshal Ltd.
Jerusalem
Printed in Israel

FOREWORD                                                                     3

This book
is dedicated to the memory of
Rabbi Aryeh Kaplan

V t irrVx nu?Q nnx rmn
f?Dp xj" di 'tnidu; p

rotzm

n"' nusj

D^nn mnsn m m tnntn xnn

4                                         INNERSPACE

Foreword
The first part 0f this book is based on a series 0f classes that Rabbi
Aryeh Kaplan z "l gave t0 a small group 0f students at his home in
Brooklyn, from August 10 t0 November 2, 1981. Thinking o f eventually
developing them int0 a book, Rabbi Kaplan had tl1e classes taped and
transcribed. Such being tl1e origin o f this book, tl1e editor was reluctant to
tamper witl1 tl1e sometimes colloquial style, for it brought vivid memories
0f tl1e author discussing these profound concepts witl1 tl1e unique clarity
and simplicity that characterized him. His frequent smile, tl1e amusing
comments witl1 which he lightened a long and involved example, his
unique use 0f Mashal (analogy) blending his scientific background witl1
his profound knowledge 0f T orah, all bring to mind tl1e attribute
Kabbalists are generally known for: Mesamchey Lev (causing others to
be happy 0f heart).

With tl1e eventual publication 0f these transcripts in mind, Rabbi
Kaplan made lists 0f all tl1e ideas mentioned in each class, and included
these summaries after tl1e corresponding transcript. Needless t0 say, these
lists were invaluable in editing tl1e material for publication. In addition,
Rabbi K aplan's voluminous written works were consulted throughout
tl1e entire editing and annotating process.
Although this book is designed as an introductory course in Kabbalah,
it includes only a brief survey of the main texts and personalities in the
field, for Rabbi Kaplan's Meditation and Kabbalah (Weiser, 1982) covers
his main research in this area. The title of this book is Rabbi K aplan's
own. As he bound the transcripts of the classes, he included an initial
sheet with the title and subtitle he had selected.
Perhaps due to the aura of secrecy around it, Kabbalah has always
been an appealing subject; there are many books printed on K abbalah.
The amount of misinformation printed under that title, however, is
staggering. In view of this. Rabbi Kaplan was concerned to give an
insider's view of how the hidden worlds relate to human experience, thus
presenting a simple outline of the most complex structures, highlighted
by his lucid explanations and examples. It is im portant to realize,
however, that he only attempted to help his listeners understand the
basic foundations of Kabbalah, without ever going into these difficult

5                                         INNERSPACE

vm

Foreword

concepts in depth. As he was discussing the structure o f Adam Kadmon,
he observed:
"As usual, these beautiful Kabbalistic concepts will appear to you very
simple, until you look at the E ti Chaim, which covers about fifty pages
discussing the structure and functions of Adam Kadmon. By the time
you are finished, besides being totally dizzy, you realize that ju st as
there is nothing simple in the visible world, to a much greater extent,
there is nothing simple in the hidden world."
It is important to warn the reader that in order to describe certain
Kabbalistic notions such as Sefirot or Panzufim, it is necessary to use
metaphors to express abstract concepts, due to the limitations of human
language. The reader should understand these descriptions as complex
poetical symbols rather than focusing on the imagery as such.
The second part of this book is an independent series of lectures on
the first chapter of the book of Ezekiel that were given from January
18 to March 15, 1982. In these lectures. Rabbi Kaplan developed the
theme of meditation as it manifests itself in prophecy. In this sense,
it is a sequel to his posthumous Jewish Meditation (Shocken, 1985).
It seemed logical to join this section to the first part of this book rather
than publish it as a separate volume because it would be useless to
a beginner without the knowledge of the basic principles o f K abbalah
expounded in the first part. In addition, they supplement the first part
in that they translate Kabbalistic concepts into our everyday life. It is
our hope that many readers will be inspired to return to the faith of
their fathers as the mystical reasons behind the commandments are
progressively unveiled to them and that this will be a source of benefit
for the soul of our departed teacher. Amen.
As in any class, there was a problem of asides to deal with. Questions
sometimes led Rabbi Kaplan in a different direction. Although he
invariably came back to the point he started out discussing, the aside
was often an important thought that' would be lost if merely ignored.
These asides were incorporated whenever they did not lead the discussion
too far afield.
It was fortunate for the Jewish people that Rabbi Kaplan always had
his classes taped. On January 4, 1982, he mentioned how im portant it
was for rabbis to have their disciples preserve their oral teachings. Rabbi
Kaplan followed a long tradition o f Kabbalistic masters whose teachings
were put into writing by their disciples. The editor o f this volume has
inserted paragraphs of transition for the purpose of readability. He
hopes not to have misinterpreted the teachings of Rabbi Kaplan in the
pf0CeM'

6                                         INNERSPACE

Jerusalem 5750 11990)

Pan I

INTRODUCTION to KABBALAH

7

C hapter 1: KABBALAH and PR O PH E C Y
What does tl1e word K abbalah mean? It stems from tl1e ro o t K abal,
meaning ''to receive.'' Tl1e term implies that it is a certain kind o f
wisdom that is received.1

Tl1e Mtshnah says that " Moses kibel-rcccived T orah on Sinai
and [subsequently] transm itted it t0 Joshua. Jo sh u a transm itted it to
tl1e Elders. Tl1e Elders transm itted it t0 tl1e Prophets. Tl1e P rophets
transmitted it t0 tl1e Men o f tl1e G reat A ssem bly." 2

Moses was tl1e m aster o f all prophets.3 He understood tl1e T o rah
completely.4 In this sense his prophetic vision was on tl1e level o f an
open vessel that could always receive m ore.5 Perhaps tl1e secret o f
Moses' receiving was, tl1e more he transm itted, tl1e m ore he was able to
receive. Tl1e Mishnah thus says, " Moses kibe! T o rah " because he was the
paradigm 0f complete and total kabbalah-receptivity t0 tl1e prophetic
experience.6

Tl1e idea 0f K abbalah, then, is t0 become com pletely infused witl1
T orah and t0 connect witl1 it on every possible level.7 W ithout K abbalah,
a person could understand T orah on a num ber o f levels. Tl1e only way
t0 grasp every single nuance 0f T o rah, however, is through tl1e prophetic
wisdom that is contained in Kabbalah.*

We can now understand what Moses " transm itted t0 Jo sh u a and
Joshua transmitted to the Elders, etc." According to the T o rah , G o d told
Moses to place his spirit upon Joshua (Numbers 27:20). In o th er w ords,
Moses was to invest Joshua with his own spirit o f prophecy.' A ccording
to an ancient Midrash, this included the necessary m ethods and disci-
plines for acquiring prophecy.10 Moses thus transm itted the keys for enter-
ing the prophetic state to Joshua. These keys constituted the K abbalah
tradition.

Throughout the period of the Prophets, the K abbalah was guarded by
the master prophets and transm itted to select disciples.11 D uring this
time, the Sanctuary, and later the First Temple, served as the focal point
for all prophetic experience.12 When the Temple was ab o u t to be
destroyed the prophet Ezekiel was shown a vision which was to signal
the end ol a thousand year period o f prophecy.13 This vision is know n as
Ma'aseh Merkavah, the Discipline (or W orkings) o f the C h a rio t.14 While
referring specifically to the opening chapter o f the book o f Ezekiel, the

8                                         INNERSPACE

term Ma'aseh Merkavah is also a general appellation for the entire
Kabbalah tradition.15
Unlike previous prophetic messages, Ezekiel's vision included an
actual detailed description of the ascent of the prophet and the barriers
he encountered before hearing God's voice. Coming at the close of the
prophetic era, Ezekiel's vision had to contain explicit directions for
attaining and entering the prophetic state. Nevertheless, these directions
were couched in extremely obscure terms. For all intents and purposes,
the Kabbalah tradition was to remain even more concealed than it had
been until now.
By the time of the building of the Second Temple, the keys to the
Kabbalah tradition had been entrusted to the last prophets of the Jewish
people as well as to its greatest sages.16Together, they constituted the 120
Men of the Great Assembly.17 It was this body of sages that formulated
the Mishnah in Tractate Chagigah, stating: "The Ma'aseh Merkavah may
be taught only to individual students (one at a time), and they must
be wise, understanding with their own knowledge." 1* They thus insured
the continued transmission of the Kabbalah tradition by restricting its
practices to the smallest possible circle of masters.19 Outside of this circle
these practices would remain almost totally unknown. This policy
continued until after the destruction of the Second Temple in 70 C.E. It
was only then that things began to change.
Looking at the history of the period for a moment, we can see that
even after the Second Temple was destroyed, the Romans still
allowed some remnant of Jewry to live in the land of Israel. However,
in the wake of the Bar Kochba revolt in 132-135 C.E., things took a
drastic turn for the worse. At this time the Romans became intent on
uprooting the last traces of Torah from the Jewish people. The Hadrianic
persecutions reached such a crescendo that all teachers of Torah were
condemned to death. This was the time of the Ten Martyrs, among
whom were the final transmitters of the Kabbalah tradition.20 As a result
of these persecutions, the oral tradition from Sinai, in
particular the Kabbalah tradition, was in danger of being forgotten.

At this time, Rabbi Akiba (50-135 C.E.) received his tradition. He was
considered the greatest sage of his generation, a master of the
revealed Torah, as well as the concealed. Rabbi Akiba possessed the
Merkavah (Chariot) tradition.21 Many sources attribute to Rabbi Akiba
the authorship of the Sefer Yetzirah (Book of Formation), one of the oldest
and most obscure Kabbalistic texts.22 Just as the great bulk of
the Talmud bears Rabbi Akiba's stamp, so does the Sefer Yetzirah.23 It was
Rabbi Akiba who transmitted these teachings in a well-defined form.

9                                       INNERSPACE

Kabbalah and Prophecy                                                  10

At this time, Rabbi Nehunia ben HaKanah and his disciple, the High
Priest Rabbi Yishmael ben Elisha, put into writing the Sefer Bahir (Book
of Illumination)24 and the Pirkey Hekhalot Rabatai (The Greater Book of
the Divine Chambers).25 These two sages redacted the traditions they
had received in order to preserve them from oblivion during the violent
times in which they lived. Commenting on the Mishnah quoted above,
Rashi (Rabbi Shlomo Yitzchaki-Yarchi 1040-1105) asserts that one of the
main texts for the study of Ma'aseh Merkavah was the Pirkey Hekhalot
Rabatai. This text contains actual meditative exercises, disciplines, and
directions for entering the prophetic state.26
The Zohar (Book of Splendor), one of the main pillars of Kabbalah,
was taught by Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai around 135 C.E. Rabbi
Shimon also lived during these tumultuous times when the Romans were
actually killing all the great teachers, the sole transmitters of the
revealed and concealed traditions. During the thirteen years that Rabbi
Shimon spent hiding in a cave with his disciples, he taught what he
had received from his teachers.27 During this time as well, he received
Divine Inspiration (Ruach HaKodesh) and merited the revelation of
Elijah the prophet.2* There was a tradition that if the Oral Torah was
endangered to the point of being forgotten, it was permitted to put it
into writing.29 Therefore, all the masters, Rabbi Akiba, Rabbi Nehunia,
Rabbi Yishmael, and Rabbi Shimon, set a precedent. They began
committing parts of the oral tradition to writing. Despite this, however,
all of these texts were not given final form for several generations after
these teachers. This would be the task of their disciples.50
All of these major texts, the Yetzirah, the Bahir, the Hekhalot Rabatai,
the Zohar, and the various parts of the revealed Torah, contained the basic
teachings which had been passed down through the prophets and
sages from Moses.51 The time had come to commit these teachings to
writing. Interestingly enough, all of these works are obscure to the point
of begging the question: what was gained? What had been written down
remained, as the Torah had been in its time, a closed book. The keys
were to remain oral. Just enough had been written down to insure that
only someone familiar with the tradition would understand.52 This
whole corpus of writings, ranging from the practical understanding of the
commandments to the most sublime experience of prophecy, remained
a closed book. Yet, the Kabbalah tradition had been saved.

We mentioned that one of the main pillars of Kabbalah was the Zohar,
from the school of Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai. It was on the teachings of
the Zohar that the two greatest Kabbalists of modern times built their
entire systems: Rabbi Moses Cordovero (d. 1570), known as the Ramak,

11                                         INNERSPACE

PART II: MEDITATION AND PROPHECY                                       145

and Rabbi Isaac Luria (1534-1572), universally referred to as the Ari, an
acronym for Elohi Rabbi Yitzchak, the Godly Rabbi Isaac.
The Zohar is opaque. Very often, the Ari used to take a passage from
the Zohar and meditate on it, perhaps repeating it over and over
like a m antra, until the inner meaning was revealed to him .35 The main
relationship between the writings of the Ari (Kitvey Ari) and the Zohar is
that without the Ari's teachings the Zohar does not make any sense at all.
You could study the Zohar, which is a very poetic text, but
you cannot detect any system or structure. Once you know the Kitvey
Ari, the entire Zohar becomes an open book. F or example, you could
study the qualities of metals and see that silver is white, gold is yellow,
copper is red, certain things are harder and others softer. Yet, you
will not understand the reasons for any of these things until you know
atomic theory and solid state physics. Once you have learned these
disciplines and you know exactly how light is reflected from certain
atoms of copper, you understand why copper is red; it all makes sense
and you have a complete picture.
This is exactly what happened to the study of Kabbalah. Before the
Ari came along, people could study the Zohar and get certain inspirational
ideas from it. But nobody could detect any underlying system. The Ari
developed a method and a vocabulary that suddenly made it all under-
standable. It was as if a person who was blind from birth suddenly
received sight.

Chapter 2: GOD and MAN
Before discussing Kabbalah, we have to discuss the concept of God.
Kabbalah is a mystical system, and at the heart of any true mystical
system is the concept of a transcendental God. This is also the concept
that we find in the Torah.

146
